# Transcript of interview-1.mp3

[00:00:01] SPEAKER_01: I'm waiting for something to change in there. I've been sitting here. I've been sitting here. I had the screen open for 10 minutes. I'm going to just Prez recording. I'm going to shut this transcript box because I can see the text going through. Yep. Okay. Okay. And I'll also try not to speak over you because that won't help with the transcript.

[00:00:36] SPEAKER_01: Right. So, first one. What critical gap do you see RVA filling for Australian research in the future? Is there a critical gap?

[00:00:49] SPEAKER_01: Absolutely. RVA fills a really important gap, satisfies a really important need, which is the ability to have standardized shared classification systems and vocabularies online in a reliable way, which is trusted, or at least the system is trustworthy. Whether the classifications are trustworthy is a separate issue, but the availability of the system managed and hosted by a reliable organization is really important. The particular niche I think that RVA fills, which is a bit different to, for example, the National Library, is that it provides a platform for anyone in the Australian research ecosystem to register controlled vocabularies and make them available so that they can be used by anyone, not just in the Australian research ecosystem,

[00:01:57] SPEAKER_01: so that it can be. And that allows the correlation of research activities and research results between different initiatives, different experiments, but using standardized vocabularies. It's absolutely critical.

[00:02:17] SPEAKER_01: So I'd ask the question, I've heard people say this, well, why would you not put them in another vocabulary server? Is that a good question? Is this content wise somewhere where you put things where you, you know, there's not a specific, very specific server off somewhere overseas? The other servers that are available tend to be either institution or discipline limited.

[00:02:46] SPEAKER_01: So there's, to my knowledge, Research Vocabularies Australia is actually unusual globally, in the sense that it provides a, standard reliable platform for anyone from any discipline and any institution in the Australian research ecosystem.

[00:03:09] SPEAKER_00: Sorry, I just, I've got a lost child in the hall.

[00:03:15] SPEAKER_01: Gwen! Hi.

[00:03:21] SPEAKER_01: Can you keep them quiet? You might want to mute.

[00:03:24] SPEAKER_00: You might want to mute. While you're dealing with that.

[00:03:27] SPEAKER_01: Yes, sorry about that.

[00:03:30] SPEAKER_01: She should find them. I said, can you just keep them quiet for an hour? Yeah, that's interesting.

[00:03:35] SPEAKER_01: It does seem to be one of the more generalist repositories. I was trying to think globally. Is there another? I'm not aware of another one. But then again, I'm less connected than I was a couple of years ago when I retired from CSIRO. So I haven't been paying as much immediate attention to it. So I think it's a good question.         So, you know, and that caveat needs to be applied to a lot of my comments during this interview. And we have to be fair about that. I'm maybe a little stale in some areas.

[00:04:08] SPEAKER_01: Okay. Yep. All right.

[00:04:13] SPEAKER_01: So the second one, second question.

[00:04:19] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. So scope and content. Yeah. Scope and content. How does RVA support? The predominant semantic artifact types that are generally coded in the domain? Actually, I should have asked you the introduction questions. I jumped straight in going. What is your other domain that you feel you can comment on in terms of content? I guess. Are you talking Earth and Environment or?

[00:04:51] SPEAKER_01: Primarily Earth and Environment. Primarily. Yes. Yeah.

[00:04:55] SPEAKER_01: So I have an interest and a curiosity about more generalized domains. So in the conversations this morning in the RDA, which is going on at the moment, there was a lot of Earth and Environment people there, but one of the guys there was talking about batteries.

[00:05:22] SPEAKER_01: And so, and that was. Yeah.   I certainly have an ambition to be thinking about these things quite generally, non-domain specific, informed primarily by the domains which I've worked most closely with, which have been Earth and Environment, but always willing and in fact, keen to think about doing things more generalized.

[00:05:53] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So in, say in the Earth and Environment domain. Yes. Does RVA cater for the predominant types that you're seeing people requesting semantic

[00:06:07] SPEAKER_01: artifact services for? Are they general simple vocabularies or is there a different type that you're hearing people want to be able to store? I'm not hearing anything else. The fact that RVA is focused on simple vocabulary, school vocabulary, and so on, I think that    

[00:06:33] SPEAKER_01: it's a little bit above the lowest common denominator, but it's sort of the, it's almost like a minimum viable product thing if you're trying to do semantic classifications and vocabularies.

[00:06:52] SPEAKER_01: Because it's based on language and language, it's not based on language and language and      it's based on language and language, it's based on language and language and so on. But I think that, I think that, uh, in an RDF store, it does mean that you don't have to be limited to Scotch, you can add additional RDF properties in with your entries, and I have taken advantage of that in some of the vocabulary which I've published. The corollary though, or the downside of that is that in order to appear in a logical way within RVA. Um, it has to be. has to have SCOSS. It will only list SCOSS concepts. So if you're publishing something which isn't in advance encoded as SCOSS concepts, then you have to add that layer to it. So that came up and this really overlaps to the next question as well, or a bit of this one and the next one. The particular set of artifacts that I've been involved in most recently with my consulting work with CSIRO were mappings and crosswalks. So those we encoded in an inspired by SSSOM form. So those are, you know, each item in the list of items within the quote vocabulary unquote.

[00:08:26] SPEAKER_01: Each item there is a mapping which maps between two concept schemes, individual concepts between those two concept schemes. And in order to get those to appear in RVA in a logical way, we had to add an additional type, if you like, to each mapping and say the mapping is a SCOSS concept.

[00:08:53] SPEAKER_01: I'm reflecting to and fro about that myself. It's not it's not an unreasonable constraint given the the design goals of RVA.

[00:09:05] SPEAKER_01: It, you know, initially it kind of came across as a little bit unnatural. But then when I thought it through a little bit, I thought, no, that's not an unreasonable constraint. This is a vocabulary service. You need to have some kind of base types that you say that you are managing and those and it's reasonable for those to be SCOSS concepts. So but it does require you to either add additional types or produce what you might call a SCOSS view of a vocabulary. And that that also leads in. To the other things that one might be interested in registering in a definitions service. And note, I changed my term there from vocabulary service to definition service. If you have a definition service, then you might want to to register things. Oh, that's my wife.

[00:10:05] SPEAKER_00: Let me let me.

[00:10:09] SPEAKER_00: That's OK.

[00:10:22] UNKNOWN: And in turn,  You want to get your sense of the art value,  But let me say something about FascC Additional to the GayIch Ker set.  If I'm going to say oh,  where I'm interested at 수 allez educatorway. бол.

[00:10:40] UNKNOWN: I'll send you the link there and I'll bring that to you on thedis dig summarize. 

[00:10:52] UNKNOWN: Thank you.

[00:11:30] SPEAKER_00: Thank you.

[00:11:42] SPEAKER_01: Yeah.

[00:11:44] SPEAKER_01: Question C, second dot point there, broader range of accessible content. I mean, you know, personally, I've been, you know, it would be good to have richer types, whether that's a general requirement, however, and given that, you know, I would, you know, I would question that. I think we have to be. Realistic about this. You can't do everything for everyone.

[00:12:18] SPEAKER_01: And ontology is a bit of a refined thing, which is not as fashionable as it was 10 years ago. And, you know, with some fairly, you know, fairly significant barriers to to to come into terms of those. And so they're not for everyone. And it may be just that those of us who are working in these more, more. More sophisticated, more elaborate systems. We've got to accept the fact that maybe we've got to support more of that ourselves and that a general purpose system like RVA may not be up to it. And the one the one piece of the puzzle that I would say the where it would be great to see RVA increasing its scope would be mappings. I think, you know, and in a sense, I think that flows from.

[00:13:12] SPEAKER_01: RVA's policies, which have have always been will provide a bucket for anyone to publish something. And what and the consequence of that is that you can get more than one vocabulary with essentially the same scope. And if you've got more than one vocabulary sitting in RVA with the same scope, then, you know, I'd suggest it's not unreasonable to ask RVA to provide a mechanism. For. More mappings between those things. So to to support that, I guess I feel fairly strongly that that that is a is really the next logical step up. And it's not a huge step up, particularly if you, for example, take a lead from the work done by the people behind SSSOM.

[00:14:11] SPEAKER_01: So. You know, there there is a standard approach to encoding mappings.

[00:14:17] SPEAKER_01: So you have multiple vocabularies in some cases covering the same scope. So so let's just close the circle here.

[00:14:29] SPEAKER_01: And and how about. I find it useful in other vocabulary serves to say.

[00:14:38] SPEAKER_01: I guess it applies more to ontologies where a concept is reused.

[00:14:43] SPEAKER_01: Yes. I find that quite like, oh, OK, if this ontology is this one, this one, this one, this, then I'm more likely to pick.

[00:14:51] SPEAKER_00: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I don't know.

[00:14:52] SPEAKER_01: It's like a rough test. So is it trustworthy? I don't know. But that is reused 20 times. So. Yeah. It means it's trusted by 20 people. And that's and that's quite a that's quite a reasonable way of evaluating trust.

[00:15:09] SPEAKER_01: There there is another service. Which I'm not sure if it's I mean, it's still up and running. I don't know how actively it's growing or is being curated. That's the one called linked open vocabularies, which is a thing run by some people in Spain.

[00:15:28] SPEAKER_01: Going back a few years, they invited me to be on their advisory board.

[00:15:35] SPEAKER_00: Excuse me.

[00:15:43] SPEAKER_01: I declined just because you can't accept every invitation that you're and they're pretty hardcore ontologists, those guys. And I can I can play in that space. But my thinking was it wasn't clear that that really was where the rest of the community is is actually happy working. So I decided that. OK. What energies I had elsewhere. Yeah.

[00:16:15] SPEAKER_00: 

[00:16:15] SPEAKER_01: So. So. But the reason I bring that up is they they they did have a bit of a you know, this one's reused here and this one's reused their thing. The other the other space where that's where you can see a bit of that would be in the fair. What's it called? Fair sharing.

[00:16:41] SPEAKER_01: Where they. They.

[00:16:43] SPEAKER_01: But you know, the problem with that, how popular is this? Who's using it thing is that, you know, it needs to be automated. And that's what that's not easy to do. I know the ontology lookup service does it well. Yeah. OK. That's right. Say it used really well. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know if that's. Yeah. I don't quite know how I will list how that works, but I find it useful. But anyways. Yeah. But that's not manual. That's automated. That's not people. Oh, OK. Manual mapping. Right. That's two separate two different. Mm hmm. I think so. Yeah. OK. So say ontologies, the handful of people that might use them.

[00:17:25] SPEAKER_00: Yeah.

[00:17:27] SPEAKER_01: Encoding them as scoss or scoss view like when they're fairly rich is probably not something the average person. Can you do it? Yes, you can do it. Or do you miss parts parts of it that you just can't. Well, it's it's.

[00:17:45] SPEAKER_01: You can you you can always produce a scoss view and it will be incomplete because it's not an ontology. OK. So it'll it'll be lossy.

[00:17:59] SPEAKER_01: And the other thing, which depending on where you sit in the ontology purist spectrum, some people will say, oh, well, that that breaks. DL or some profile of owl and this and they get their knickers in a knot about about the the, you know, whether it'll mean that you can no longer do proper inferencing and reasoning and all that sort of thing. And I think, well, yeah, of course you can't because it's not, you know, because you're producing this view. But but but why would you produce scoss view? You would produce a scoss view. So that people who really are only interested in a scoss view, you know, are handed some URIs that they can use for some concepts which are also related or linked in to something that's richer somewhere. And it basically just saves you from from having to, you know, read to make a copy.

[00:19:05] SPEAKER_01: So of concepts which we don't.   Which have already been defined and already been assigned URIs. And in one space, you'll be told that there are classes and in another place you'll be told, well, for this URI, we can also think of it as a scoss concept.

[00:19:23] SPEAKER_01: So so I think that's a perfectly reasonable sort of alternative way of, if you like, advertising the semantic content. So people that do have ontologies, what do they do with them? Say turn the answers to ontology. Yeah. Yeah. What happens with that? That's that's that's yeah, we ought to just have a.

[00:19:54] SPEAKER_01: This would be the kind of thing which which Nick would would possibly have thought of, probably as thought of is you just have a filter that you can run your ontology through, which would automatically generate a filter.  And then you would have a filter that would generate a concept for every class. And a.

[00:20:11] SPEAKER_01: And would take all of the properties and make them all sub properties of scoss semantic relation.

[00:20:25] SPEAKER_01: Or something, you know.

[00:20:27] SPEAKER_01: So so that, you know, it would be best, frankly, if that were automated. Now, I'm I'm. Maybe I'm making some assumptions which would need to be tested there as to whether what would get broken and what would really be not possible. Having a go at that. That's a good question then for Nick. Yeah. You know, could could we automate the production of scoss views of our ontologies?

[00:21:01] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. And the other topic. 

[00:21:07] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. Like you know. If you want, like. That worked perfectly for the document. Because we put mac and mac in our training system.     And so the technicalod, and that would be alıt alyyl is alyyl too. The other cars And then you would put scoss in the layout path.

[00:21:22] UNKNOWN: The storage, I mean, as I.    To be able to251

[00:21:22] SPEAKER_01: You could be able to put r 측, ylegrand and other.   fs, you know, you are still öncekinterOOM of langpnum and tantra Y ja LiO Escape Swab, you mentally stop uWM video, meaning that the spreadsheet so so you know the the the the reason why i think saying that generating a scoss view of an owl ontology is at least plausible is that you've got it in a in a regular form to start with and a predictable form which is classes and object properties um so um uh yeah so so so going that way where you are essentially flattening it is is easier than going the other way where you're trying to promote something from an unsemantic representation into a semantic representation and then we're getting into tooling questions which aren't so much covered in here but there's questions around uh the survey we've got some we had a question about tooling to see what people were using and how they found it how they find Pool Party if they use Pool Party but maybe we should go on to what aspects of RVA uh are working working well yeah and you would not change yeah well i i don't use Pool Party so i the few times i've used it i found myself fighting with it rather than rather than uh leveraging it and that's that was you know to a certain extent that was my fault because i was coming into it with um some preconceptions about what semantics what semantic technologies should look like and and if Pool Party didn't match then that was as much my fault as Pool Party's fault um but i wasn't prepared to abandon my um my existing uh platforms knowledge so so i just accepted the fact that i would work outside of that and i mean that it's interesting with that even because you you know that i've been using the top range platform for years and years and i've been having lots of times where i've just started using the platform to keep my FlผM and yeah so just definitely the challenge on the whole i think was is understanding the language and you know you know i mean i did is i thought it was a pretty it was it's great that i uh wanted to use it but it's not actually that there's a lot of people out there who do have the that I'm utilising there. And it's not reasonable to expect everyone to be able to do that.

[00:24:11] SPEAKER_01: So when I've been attempting to teach new people coming onto this, then it's amazing how many bits and pieces you discover that, oh yeah, I know this, but I've now got to explain it. Why URIs are in angle brackets when you're writing them out in Turtle or they're this compact form with a colon in the middle. And they both mean the same thing. They're both URIs. But a normal person looking at those says, no, they're not the same thing

[00:24:43] SPEAKER_01: because they haven't got the lenses on that I've got, which sees them that way. So, and, you know, I know people, anyone in the last 10 years is coming along to look at these things, wants to look at them in JSON. And JSON gives me the shits. But,

[00:25:02] SPEAKER_01: but, but, you know, that's not a fight I'm going to win. Not a fight I really want to win. You know, the JSON ecosystem is very, very rich and people really should be using JSON. It's just, just, just, it does my head in. So,

[00:25:18] SPEAKER_01: and then there's YAML coming along as well, or come along.

[00:25:23] SPEAKER_01: So RDF and YAML is not something I've actually got my head around either. I'd like to, but, but, but I'm, I'm way more efficient just working in Turtle and then, and then using tools to, to, to convert it into other forms. And that's, and that's fine. So, and that's another thing I use TopBraid for. I mean, I haven't renewed my TopBraid license in years because the one I've got is, works fine. And I'm only using it in a relatively limited way. So, so that's all. And you've worked with some people, like I know with me, we've used the, um, SKOS, SKOS Play. Oh, yeah. A couple of different Excel. Yeah. I haven't used that recently. The last time I was doing some conversions, I was just using Python. Um, but, and that was with some assist, you know, and it wasn't really me writing it. Was that Excel to Python? Excel. Excel. Using Python to get to RDF? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Oh, that's all. So you've been loading things into data frames in, in, in Python and, and who knows what. I'm a bit too old to learn too many new tricks, but, um,

[00:26:35] SPEAKER_01: and it's, and it's not really, it's not my day job anymore, is it? No, no, no, it's hard. So, so I have no opinion on Pool Party. Yeah. Okay. Um, RVA, you know, I, I, I really do think that the, the technical platform that RVA is sitting on, which is, um, um, the SysFock thing, which underneath that you've got, I can't open RDF for whatever it's called. Um, um, and there's some limitations that that platform introduces on the one hand. I know that, um, it, each vocabulary is in its own instance of the, of the RDF store. Um, and that's, that's, that's the way it works. It used to be called Sesame. It's called open RDF or something. These, these days. Um, um, but that, that choice is good. The thing that it supports is a very strong versioning scheme and the ability to roll back and see all the versions of a vocabulary very, very discreetly.

[00:27:50] SPEAKER_01: However, it's bad because it means that links between vocabularies that are all sitting within our VM,    the I essentially don't exist.

[00:28:03] SPEAKER_01: So, so, and it's, it's, you know, the, the whole CISFAR thing is, is, um, you know, 15 years old now. And, and the, this, it's, it's, uh, it's visual presentation is very creaky and the, um, the API, which is actually what CISFAR is, is it hasn't been taken up by anybody else. We'd be better looking at a more widely used platform. Now, what that is, I don't know. Could be Skosmos, could be PRES.

[00:28:46] SPEAKER_01: But I don't think RVA should be running a bespoke stack, which is what it is at the moment. I think it should be adopting a stack which is used by other people as well. It should be joining a bigger software ecosystem with this.

[00:29:06] SPEAKER_01: Open source is, you know, always, I mean, more or less everything anybody does these days is open source anyway. But if you're the only ones using and maintaining this software stack, then you're not getting, you're not leveraging anybody else's contributions.

[00:29:25] SPEAKER_01: And you're not getting the same amount of money.  You're essentially static. So that needs to change.

[00:29:34] SPEAKER_01: Top three changes. Mappings.

[00:29:39] SPEAKER_01: New platform.

[00:29:48] SPEAKER_01: Something around governance. Governance is a bit creaky at the moment.

[00:29:54] SPEAKER_01: You know, the open.

[00:29:58] SPEAKER_01: System, you know, the fact that anyone can submit and publish one is good, but it can lead to a bit of a mess.

[00:30:10] SPEAKER_01: May either probably,

[00:30:12] SPEAKER_01: it would probably be useful to have some kind of minimal review cycle. So when someone submits a vocabulary that they get feedback on whether, instead of, submitting a new vocabulary, perhaps they could use this one that's already there.

[00:30:31] SPEAKER_01: Or,

[00:30:33] SPEAKER_01: you know, have you talked to these other people in your discipline? You know, the probably, you know, people should be encouraged to use the demo server to get things up, to have a poke around and have a look at them. But then the transition from the demos, the production server probably should, the probably should be a governance step as well as a technical step.

[00:30:55] SPEAKER_00: Hmm.

[00:30:59] SPEAKER_01: So, you know, a review basically.

[00:31:03] SPEAKER_01: I think that's, I think that's where I would go with that. Yeah. Now I did. There was an additional question, you know, Rowan and I were chatting yesterday and said, well,

[00:31:15] SPEAKER_01: do we need to think about a minimum metadata model, you know, a profile for vocabularies and how that works.         

[00:31:32] SPEAKER_00: That's awesome, You think you'd like to share that?

[00:31:37] SPEAKER_01: I do want to talk with you about that because I think that's helpful because by right now it's

[00:31:39] SPEAKER_01: it's a bit more uncomfortable.

[00:31:42] SPEAKER_00: You're you know, getting started as a pilot operator. And it's more of a bit like that now.

[00:31:50] SPEAKER_00: That's true.  So we've got a couple of things to share. I think if you maybe want to take some of that outside of, but if you'd like to say an evidence of how,

[00:31:55] SPEAKER_01: you know, we may practice But I did miss what you were saying about what you and Rowan have been discussing. Yeah.

[00:32:03] SPEAKER_01: The requirement potentially for when you say governance, there's some checking whether there's a minimum metadata profile

[00:32:14] SPEAKER_01: for vocabularies that we either...

[00:32:18] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. Do we have it? Do we need it? I mean, there is one implied when you publish something in RBA. There are some... There is metadata about these things which is going in. You can't submit something without filling out some of those forms when you're submitting. Now, the adequacy of those...

[00:32:44] SPEAKER_01: Getting people to fill out metadata when they're submitting stuff is always a challenge.

[00:32:52] SPEAKER_01: But it's not unreasonable for a service like this. Where you really are offering a very, very valuable service to say, well, in order to utilize this really valuable service, then you have to, you know, there's a couple of hoops you have to jump through. I think the guidance about those could be better.

[00:33:16] SPEAKER_01: The forms probably just need more examples. You know, I wonder if there could be examples included in the forms, you know, at least for a mouse.

[00:33:26] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. You know, maybe just text in the form saying, you know, for... Because some of the prompts from the names of the fields where you're typing stuff in, it's not obvious why it matters, you know. So, for example, where you have to put in something about the version. Well, this is going to appear in the URI of the service. So, don't make it a long sentence.

[00:33:52] SPEAKER_01: Right? Yeah, yeah. If I hadn't have had you there talking that... And you had gone through with me... Yeah. I wouldn't have known what to do. Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly, exactly. You know, this has implications for how this is going to look once it's published on the current system.

[00:34:09] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. Now, you know, that's some technical choices that Rowan and... And what's his face?

[00:34:19] SPEAKER_01: Sort of came to when they were putting... Richard. Richard, yeah, exactly, when they were putting it together. So... So... And there were other choices that might have been made, but they were after generating unique URIs, and so they were using information submitted by the submitter in order to build those. And that's a reasonable strategy, except that the submitters didn't necessarily know that that's what was going on. Yeah, yeah. Actually, it's a bit of a side question. Do you have any comments on the PIDs in the workflow of RVA? Any recommendations of... Well, I would hold up on those... PID systems or... Because of the...

[00:35:04] SPEAKER_01: You know, I mean, some of that stuff is a consequence of SISSVoc. And if I'm already saying move to something different from SISSVoc, then any detailed recommendations I'd have at this stage would be moot, or they'd need to be reconsidered in the light of whatever... whatever other platform was being used. So I'm reluctant to go into details there. So at the moment, is it handles? Is that what you call them? No, no. It's not the handles. It's the... It's the... When you get a...

[00:35:39] SPEAKER_01: Yeah, exactly.

[00:35:42] SPEAKER_01: The what? Sorry, I interrupted. The slug. The slug. That's good. Absolutely.

[00:35:48] SPEAKER_01: Okay.

[00:35:49] SPEAKER_00: All right. Uh...

[00:35:54] SPEAKER_01: All right. So what would be the implications if we did not upgrade?

[00:36:03] SPEAKER_01: As you say, can't be able to handle map-ins or upgrade. I think RVA is...

[00:36:13] SPEAKER_01: will increasingly not...

[00:36:19] SPEAKER_01: You know, what we're already seeing is, you know, anyone who contracts...

[00:36:24] SPEAKER_01: Curawang gets a bespoke Prez installation put up.

[00:36:32] SPEAKER_01: And... And... And that's... And that's fine for organisations that have got a budget to go and contract Curawang. But it means that more and more vocabularies are going to be off on their own services. And RVA will end up just being... being the bottom of the barrel of the ones who don't have anywhere better to go. And... And, you know, possibly will lose some respect.

[00:37:03] SPEAKER_01: And, you know, the sort of... And credibility and trust because of that.

[00:37:12] SPEAKER_01: So I think it needs to keep up in order to retain the trust that it has had.

[00:37:20] SPEAKER_00: Mm-hmm. Yeah.

[00:37:24] SPEAKER_00: Yeah.

[00:37:26] SPEAKER_00: Mm. So opportunities...

[00:37:30] SPEAKER_01: Exploring opportunities.

[00:37:33] SPEAKER_01: I guess you did mention the linked data, the linked open vocabulary. Linked open vocabulary. But are there anything... Anything kind of services overseas that... Or, you know, anywhere that you've thought, oh, well, that's great. No. That RVA could look at... That RVA could look at adopting part of it, you know, adopting that stack or... OLS is pretty good.

[00:38:03] SPEAKER_01: But OLS, you know, comes out of the medical and life sciences communities. And they have a lot of money, don't they?

[00:38:12] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. So do they store vocabularies as well?

[00:38:17] SPEAKER_01: You can register vocabularies there and upload them there. Yes. Okay. Well... Okay. Can you do it in OLS? I'm not sure.

[00:38:26] SPEAKER_01: Maybe that would be by a portal. An agri-portal is where you put things in. And, I mean, you know, the other...

[00:38:35] SPEAKER_01: The other system, of course, which is running is the one from... Mike wants his name up in Brisbane.

[00:38:44] SPEAKER_01: Glenn's cousin.

[00:38:47] SPEAKER_01: Came along to the first two vocabulary workshops.

[00:38:51] SPEAKER_00: Um...

[00:38:54] SPEAKER_00: Coming from the medical domain.

[00:38:59] SPEAKER_00: I can't remember. Anyway. Pronto server?

[00:39:03] SPEAKER_01: Yeah.

[00:39:05] SPEAKER_01: Yes. Pronto server. Exactly. But that's full on... You know, that thing is the biomedical community has got a very different approach to the use of semantic technologies to most of the rest of the communities. It's all very... It's very cross-linked and interlinked. And they bought into it full time. Full time. And there's no other community that's even close to understanding what they're doing, let alone leveraging it.

[00:39:40] SPEAKER_01: So...

[00:39:43] SPEAKER_01: And they're not even... There's ways in which they're...

[00:39:47] SPEAKER_01: You know, I don't particularly like what they do. But in terms of the coherence, the community... Yeah.  I mean, they're kind of exemplary, but in a way which is really hard to reproduce.

[00:39:59] SPEAKER_01: You know, for one thing, they have all kinds of regulatory sort of things which end up requiring people to use the system, which then ends up in introducing a whole quality assurance system, which very few disciplines would have access to because they don't have the regulatory... Yeah.

[00:40:24] SPEAKER_01: ...imperative.

[00:40:25] SPEAKER_01: So... Yeah. In some cases... And if you're going to be put on an operating table, you want to know... Exactly. ...that the data's... Exactly. ...good. We don't have perhaps that... We don't have that. ...driver in earth and environment. Mm-hmm. It'd be nice if the environment was taken as seriously as that, but it isn't.

[00:40:43] SPEAKER_00: Hmm.

[00:40:45] SPEAKER_01: Have you had any experience or heard anything about the Onto Alliance? No.

[00:40:51] SPEAKER_01: Ever heard of instances?  Oh. Yeah. So they're... They have got the spinoffs of implementations at BioPortal, AgriPortal, whatever portal. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. I don't know much about them. Just came across... Yeah. The Onto Alliance and they're spinning out instances of this... Okay.

[00:41:14] SPEAKER_01: ...stack or whatever it is. So... Yeah. I need to close the door so we're not getting quite as much back row.

[00:41:22] SPEAKER_01: Yeah.

[00:41:22] UNKNOWN: Yeah. Yeah.  Yeah.

[00:41:25] SPEAKER_01: Yeah.

[00:41:26] SPEAKER_01: No, I don't. I haven't been following that, Megan. Mm-hmm. So...

[00:41:34] SPEAKER_01: That's Clement...

[00:41:36] SPEAKER_00: Okay.

[00:41:37] SPEAKER_01: ...leading that.

[00:41:38] SPEAKER_00: Yeah. Okay.

[00:41:39] SPEAKER_01: So...

[00:41:40] SPEAKER_00: Mm-hmm.

[00:41:41] SPEAKER_01: It's fairly full on probably, I imagine, like ontology stuff.

[00:41:47] SPEAKER_00: Mm-hmm. Yeah, it would be.

[00:41:50] SPEAKER_01: All right. Yeah. Yep. Okay. Yeah.

[00:41:53] UNKNOWN:         

[00:41:53] SPEAKER_01: So even if a service doesn't take... If ontology is out of scope... Yes. ...to do the mappings... Yes.

[00:42:03] SPEAKER_01: ...you still... I think this is what just... I'm really trying to identify there an incremental improvement.

[00:42:14] SPEAKER_00: Yep.

[00:42:15] SPEAKER_01: Right? And it's one that... I made the case. It logically follows from some of the work that RVA is already doing, which is hosting... Not duplicates, but vocabularies with overlapping scope, and therefore the need to have something which manages those overlaps, which is mappings. Hmm.

[00:42:45] SPEAKER_00: Okay.

[00:42:47] SPEAKER_01: Yep.

[00:42:47] SPEAKER_00: Yeah.

[00:42:48] SPEAKER_01: So I think...

[00:42:50] SPEAKER_00: I think we're getting towards the bottom of the... Yeah.

[00:42:52] SPEAKER_01: Whether there's anything else in particular... Yeah. ...you want to comment on or you think we haven't covered?

[00:42:59] SPEAKER_01: I mean, look, I could bang on for years in a sense, but I'm also aware that the exercise that you're doing here, you need to have discrete recommendations and steps forward that you can take. And so I'm trying to be sensible about that. And furthermore, let's be clear.

[00:43:29] SPEAKER_01: Let's not overreach, but let's also not undershoot. So, yeah.

[00:43:40] SPEAKER_01: Yep. Can I ask a favor? Can I get you to just to repeat what...

[00:43:46] SPEAKER_01: Sure. ...you said earlier? Yeah. So, I think that the vocabulary is in a discrete... The three thing? The vocabulary, the loading, and how it's a discrete... Can you explain that again, Tori? Each vocabulary is in a discrete triple store, which is essentially running in its own machine, its own instance, or something separate from every other vocabulary in RBA. Oh, okay. So, it's separate... A separate container. ...triple store. Yes. Separate container. Yes. Separate container. So, does that make it hard to... The registry metadata, say, is separate to... Yeah. ...is not loaded as part of that vocabulary in the triple store? So, it's hard to search across... No, it's not. No, no, it's not. That's in a separate layer. Yep. So, that makes it perhaps hard to... Yeah. ...be able to search across and link and map... It's not. ...in the triple store.  On the other hand, there was that linked data registry thing, which you may vaguely remember, which we were trying to use for a while, and that was a case where the company who was responsible, what were they called, Epimorphics, tried to do the whole thing inside one triple store, and it ended up being quite complex. Yeah.

[00:45:11] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. Yeah. And I'm not sure where the linked data registry is these days, whether it's still a maintained product or whatever. Okay. It was being used a bit by the UK Met Office and a bit by the French Geological Survey, and I'm not sure whether they're still using or supporting it. They had all of the metadata and all of the versioning and all of the content all in a single triple store. Yeah. And it was kind of the paradigmatic, this ought to be able to do everything, so we will do everything. Now, I suspect they overshot because it ended up having a few too many abstraction layers in there. There was always, for every item in there, there was both the item and the registration record for the item in the triple store. So there was kind of a shadow of two.   There was two quite elaborate artifacts for each item in there. Maybe that's just, you know, I've seen it written up two or three times and it almost seems like that is actually the only logical way to do it, but their implementation was pretty mind-bending. So the dogs just let out now.

[00:46:35] SPEAKER_01: So you need, yeah, so the comment earlier you said about support, I guess. Yeah. Yeah.  I'd say support is, is there something out there that's, you know, broadly adopted enough and open and there's a community that ARDC staff can... Exactly. I'd be looking at Skosmos or PRAES.

[00:46:55] SPEAKER_01: And Skosmos, I think is part of a little ecosystem together with VocBench. And the VocBench thing would be your Pool Party replacement and the Skosmos would be the SISSVoc replacement part of the puzzle. That is a good point.  okay i think that's how it works um but you know and rock bench i think is an italian product and i think scott's loss is a finnish i think these maintainers that are in finland they and they work quite closely together i believe they did last time i looked at them which is a few years ago now um but um um and otherwise you're at the mercy of carowong or carowong do they implement they use scott's moss no no no they've got they use Prez Prez yeah vot Prez and Prez so so uh you know i mean they're they're they're they're nearer and um um but you know you gotta you gotta you gotta wrangle nick and his um his his delivery priorities and such like um is Prez an open source that's yeah all of their carowong of uh adopt all of all of their software that is is sitting in github so you can so it's open source but carowong developed it i mean nick developed Prez they developed Prez oh yeah okay oh yeah yeah that's that's their you know it was i don't have it anymore was their was their core product now you can just pick it up and deploy it but you know you're more likely to want to contract them to do it for you

[00:48:37] SPEAKER_01: yep yep um and then you need to make then you need to make sure the contract's written well

[00:48:46] SPEAKER_01: so because nick's got a bit of a reputation about not not finishing his deliveries

[00:48:54] SPEAKER_01: no that's not that's good yeah that's really good to know very insightful thank you i know we're on time so i mean it's a good thing that you're doing it for me i'm not going to be doing it for you yeah you know i'm a big fan of nick's work don't get me wrong um but but but but as a contractor i i know from many people's reports

