# Transcript of interview-1.flac

[00:00:00] SPEAKER_01: Waiting for something to change in there. Yes, it's recording. I can see that now. Yep. It says it's been recording for 10 minutes or something.

[00:00:10] SPEAKER_01: Oh, I've been sitting here. I've had the screen open for 10 minutes. I only just press recording. I've got to shut this transcript box because I can see the text going through.

[00:00:25] SPEAKER_00: 

[00:00:26] SPEAKER_01: OK. And I'll also try not to speak over you because that won't help with the... LAUGHTER

[00:00:34] SPEAKER_01: Right. So, first one.

[00:00:38] SPEAKER_01: What critical gap does the RVA filling for Australian research in the future? Is there a critical gap?

[00:00:48] SPEAKER_01: Absolutely. RVA fills a really important gap, satisfies a really important need, which is the ability to have standardised shared classification systems and vocabularies online in a reliable way, which is trusted, or at least the system is trustworthy, whether the classifications are trustworthy is a separate issue, but the availability of the system managed and hosted by a reliable organisation is really important.

[00:01:26] SPEAKER_01: The particular niche, I think, that RVA fills, which is a bit different to, for example, the National Library, is that it provides a platform for anyone in the Australian research ecosystem to register controlled vocabularies and make them available so that they can be used by anyone, not just in the Australian research ecosystem.

[00:01:56] SPEAKER_01: And that allows the correlation of research activities and research results between different initiatives, different experiments,

[00:02:10] SPEAKER_01: but using standardised vocabularies, it's absolutely critical.

[00:02:15] SPEAKER_01: So I'd ask the question, I've heard people say this, why would you not put them in another vocabulary server? Is this content-wise somewhere where you'd put things where there's not a specific, very specific server off somewhere overseas? The other servers that are available tend to be either institution or discipline limited.

[00:02:44] SPEAKER_01: So to my knowledge, research recovery in Australia is actually unusual globally, in the sense that it provides a standard reliable platform for anyone from any discipline and any institution in the Australian research ecosystem.

[00:03:08] SPEAKER_01: Sorry, I've got a lost child in the hole.

[00:03:14] SPEAKER_01: Gwen.

[00:03:19] SPEAKER_01: I said, can you keep them quiet?

[00:03:22] SPEAKER_00: You might want to mute while you're dealing with that.

[00:03:26] SPEAKER_01: Sorry about that.

[00:03:28] SPEAKER_01: She should find them. I said, can you just keep them quiet for an hour? Yeah, that's interesting.

[00:03:34] SPEAKER_01: It does seem to be one of the more generalist repositories. I was trying to think globally, is there another? I'm not aware of another one, but then again, I'm less connected than I was a couple of years ago when I retired from CSIRO. So I haven't been paying as much immediate attention to it. So, you know, and that caveat needs to be applied to a lot of my comments during this interview. We have to be fair about that. I may be a little stale in some areas.

[00:04:07] SPEAKER_01: Okay. Yep. All right.

[00:04:12] SPEAKER_01: So the second one, second question.

[00:04:18] SPEAKER_01: Yeah, so scope and content.

[00:04:23] SPEAKER_01: How does RVA support the predominant semantic artifact types that are generally coded in the domain? Actually, I should have asked you the introduction questions. I jumped straight in going, are you, what is your other domain that you feel you can comment on in terms of content? I guess, are you talking earth and environment or?

[00:04:50] SPEAKER_01: Primarily earth and environment.  Yes. Yeah. I mean, I have an interest and a curiosity about more generalized domains. So in the conversations this morning, in the RDA, which is going on at the moment, you know, there was, there was a lot of earth and environment people there, but one of the guys there was talking about batteries.

[00:05:21] SPEAKER_01: And so, and that was, I certainly have an ambition to be thinking about these things quite generally, non-domain specific. It formed primarily by the domains, which I've worked most closely with, which have been earth and environment, but always willing and in fact keen to think about doing things more generalized.

[00:05:52] SPEAKER_01:   Yeah. So in, say in the earth and environment domain, does RVA cater for the predominant types that you're seeing people requesting semantic artifacts services for? Are they general simple vocabularies or is there a different type that you're hearing people want to be able to store? I'm not hearing, I'm not hearing anything else. The fact that RVA is focused on simple vocabulary, SCOS vocabularies, which are not that simple, but it's kind of a, it's a little bit above lowest common denominator, but it's, it's sort of the, it's almost like a minimum viable product thing if you're, if you're trying to do semantic

[00:06:47] SPEAKER_01: classifications and vocabularies.

[00:06:50] SPEAKER_01: Because it's based on an RDF store, it does mean that you don't have to be limited to SCOS. You can add additional RDF properties in with your entries and I have taken advantage of that in some of the vocabularies which I've published. The corollary though, or the downside of that is that in order to appear in a logical way within RVA, it has to have SCOS. It will only list SCOS concepts. So if you're publishing something which isn't in advance encoded as SCOS concepts, then you have to add that layer to it.

[00:07:38] SPEAKER_01: So that, that came up and this really overlaps to the next question as well.

[00:07:45] SPEAKER_01: Or a bit of this one and the next one. The particular set of artifacts that I've been involved in most recently with my consulting work with CSIRO were mappings and crosswalks. So those we encoded in an inspired by SSSOM form. So those are each item in the list of items within the quote vocabulary unquote. Each item there is a mapping which maps between two concept schemes, individual concepts between those two concept schemes. And in order to get those to appear in RVA in a logical way, we had to add an additional type if you like to each mapping and say the mapping is a SCOS concept.

[00:08:51] SPEAKER_01: I'm reflecting to and fro about that myself. It's not an unreasonable constraint given the design goals of RVA.

[00:09:04] SPEAKER_01: It, you know, initially it kind of came across as a little bit unnatural, but then when I thought it through a little bit, I thought, no, that's not an unreasonable constraint. This is a vocabulary service. You need to have some kind of base types that you say that you are managing and those, and it's reasonable for those to be SCOS concepts.

[00:09:26] SPEAKER_01: So, but it does require you to either add additional types or produce what you might call a SCOS view of a vocabulary. And that also leads into the other things that one might be interested in registering in a definitions service. And note, I changed my term there from vocabulary service to definition service. If you have a definition service, then you might want to register.

[00:10:00] SPEAKER_01: Oh, that's my wife. Cool.

[00:10:03] SPEAKER_01: Let me, let me.

[00:10:07] SPEAKER_00: A second.

[00:11:00] UNKNOWN: Okay.

[00:11:19] SPEAKER_00: I'm back.

[00:11:22] SPEAKER_00: I'm back. Sorry about that.

[00:11:25] SPEAKER_01: Now you're muted.

[00:11:29] SPEAKER_01: Oh, whoops. There we go.

[00:11:32] SPEAKER_01: All right. Yeah. No problem. Yes. So, yeah, I was talking about alternatives and this is in your, your, your, your question. See, second dot point there, broader range of accessible content. I think, you know, personally I've been, you know, it'd be good to have richer types, whether that's a general requirement, however, and given that, you know, I would, you know, I would question that. I think, I think we have to be realistic about this. You can't do everything for everyone.

[00:12:17] SPEAKER_01: And ontologies is a bit of a refined thing, which is not as fashionable as it was 10 years ago. And, you know, with some fairly, you know, fairly significant barriers to, to, to come into terms with those. And so they're not for everyone. And it may be just that those of us who are working in these more, more sophisticated, more elaborate systems, we've got to accept the fact that maybe we've got to support more of that ourselves and that a general purpose system like RVA may not be up to it. The one, the one piece of the puzzle that I would say, where it would be great to see RVA increasing its scope would be mappings.

[00:13:04] SPEAKER_01: I think, you know, and in a sense, I think that flows from RVA's policies, which have always been, will provide a bucket for anyone to publish something. And what, and the consequence of that is that you can get more than one vocabulary with essentially the same scope. And if you've got more than one vocabulary sitting in RVA with the same scope, then, you know, I'd suggest it's not unreasonable to ask RVA to provide a mechanism for mappings between those things. So to support that, I guess I feel fairly strongly that that is really the next logical step up, and it's not a huge step up.

[00:14:01] SPEAKER_01: Particularly if you, for example, take a lead from the work done by the people behind SSSOM. So, you know, there is a standard approach to encoding mappings. So you have multiple vocabularies, in some cases covering the same scope. So let's just close the circle here.

[00:14:28] SPEAKER_01: And how about, I find it useful in other vocabulary servers to see, I guess it applies to ontologies where a concept is reused.

[00:14:42] SPEAKER_01: Yes. I find that quite like, oh, okay, if this ontology uses this one, this one, this one, this, then I'm more likely to pick.

[00:14:50] SPEAKER_00: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I don't know.

[00:14:51] SPEAKER_01: It's like a rough test. Is it trustworthy? I don't know. But that is reused 20 times. So it means it's trusted by 20 people. And that's quite a reasonable way of evaluating trust.

[00:15:08] SPEAKER_01: There is another service which I'm not sure if it's, I mean, it's still up and running. I don't know how actively it's growing or is being curated. That's the one called Linked Open Vocabularies, which is a thing run by some people in Spain.

[00:15:26] SPEAKER_01: Going back a few years, they invited me to be on their advisory board.

[00:15:34] SPEAKER_00: Excuse me.

[00:15:42] SPEAKER_01: I declined just because you can't accept every invitation.

[00:15:51] SPEAKER_01: They're pretty hardcore ontologists, those guys. And I can play in that space. But my thinking was it wasn't clear that that really was where the rest of the community is. It was actually happy working. So I decided to put what energies I had elsewhere.

[00:16:14] SPEAKER_01: But the reason I bring that up is they did have a bit of a, you know, this one's reused here and this one's reused there thing. The other space where you can see a bit of that would be in the fair sharing.

[00:16:43] SPEAKER_01: You know, the problem with that, how popular is this, who's using it thing, is that, you know, it needs to be automated. And that's not easy to do. I know the Ontology Lookup Service does it well.

[00:16:58] SPEAKER_01: That's where I see it used really well. Yeah, I don't know if that's, yeah, I don't quite know how OLS, how that works, but I find it useful. But anyways, but that's not manual. That's automated. That's not people doing the manual mapping, right? That's two separate, two different issues. I think so. Yeah. Okay. So say ontologies, a handful of people that might use them.

[00:17:24] SPEAKER_00: Yeah.

[00:17:25] SPEAKER_01: Encoding them as scos or a scos view, like when they're fairly rich is probably not something the average person, can you do it? Yes, you can do it. Or do you miss parts of it that you just can't?

[00:17:43] SPEAKER_01: It's, you can always produce a scos view and it will be incomplete because it's not an ontology. Okay. So it'll be lossy.

[00:17:58] SPEAKER_01: And the other thing which, depending on where you sit in the ontology purist spectrum, some people will say, ah, well, that breaks DL or some profile of OWL and this, and they get their knickers in a knot about the, you know, whether it'll mean that you can no longer do proper inferencing and reasoning and all that sort of thing. And I think, well, yeah, of course you can't because it's not, you know, because you're producing this view, but, but, but, and why would you produce a scos view? You would produce a scos view so that people who really are only interested in a scos view,

[00:18:43] SPEAKER_01: you know, are handed some URIs that they can use for some concepts, which are also related or linked in to something that's richer somewhere. And it basically just saves you from, from having to, you know, re to make a copy.

[00:19:04] SPEAKER_01: So of concepts which, which have already been defined and already been assigned URIs and in one space you'll, you'll be told that there are classes and in another place, you'll be told, well, for this URI, we could also think of it as a scos concept.

[00:19:22] SPEAKER_01: Okay. So, so I, I think that's a perfectly reasonable sort of alternative way of, if you like, advertising the semantic content.

[00:19:36] SPEAKER_01: So people that do have ontologies, what do they do with them? Say, turn the answers ontology.

[00:19:46] SPEAKER_01: What happens with those? That's, that's, that's, yeah, we, we ought to just have a,

[00:19:53] SPEAKER_01: this would be the kind of thing which, which Nick would, would possibly have thought of, probably has thought of, is you just have a filter that you can run your ontology through, which would automatically generate a concept for every class. And I would take all of the properties and make them all sub properties of

[00:20:19] SPEAKER_01: Scott's semantic relation or something, you know?

[00:20:26] SPEAKER_01: So, so that, you know, it would be best, frankly, if that were automated. Now I'm, I'm, maybe I'm making some assumptions which would need to be tested there as to whether what would get broken and what would really be not possible. Having a go at that. That's a good question then for Nick.

[00:20:49] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. You know, could, could we automate the production of Scott's views of our ontologies?

[00:20:59] SPEAKER_01: Yep. Yeah. And the other types, you know, like, terminal, like taxonomies.  Like that's fairly, you know, can be... Yeah, well, the automation there would be harder because the, the representation of them is inconsistent. You know, some of your taxonomies are, are only available from a PDF, you know, and some of them will be in some kind of spreadsheet, but, you know, who knows how it's organized in the spreadsheet. So, so, you know, the, the, the, the reason why I think saying that generating a Scott's view of an L ontology is at least plausible is that you've got it in a, in a regular form to start with and a predictable form, which is classes and object properties.

[00:21:56] SPEAKER_01: So, yeah, so, so going that way where you are essentially flattening it is, is easier than going the other way where you're trying to promote something from an unsemantic representation into a semantic representation.

[00:22:16] SPEAKER_01: And then we're getting into tooling questions, which aren't so much covered in here, but... There's questions around the survey. We've got some, we had a question about tooling to see what people were using and how they found it, how they find pool party if they use pool party, but maybe we should go on

[00:22:39] SPEAKER_01: to what aspects of RVA are working, working well and you would not change. Yeah, well, I don't use pool parties, so I, the few times I've used it, I found myself fighting with it rather than, rather than leveraging it. And that's, that was, you know, to a certain extent, that was my fault because I was coming into it with some preconceptions about what semantics and what semantic technologies should look like. And, and if pool party didn't match, then that was as much my fault as pool party's fault. But I wasn't prepared to abandon my, my existing platforms knowledge. So I just accepted the fact that I would work outside of that. And I mean, it's interesting that that even because you, you know, that I've been using the TopBraid platform for years and years and years. I no longer use TopBraid for any editing work. I only use TopBraid for essentially a kind of validation step. So I do all my editing in text and then I try and load it in TopBraid. And if TopBraid spits something out, then that just helps me debug what I've been doing in text.

[00:23:55] SPEAKER_01: So, but you know, that's a very arcane set of skills that I'm, that I'm utilizing there. And, and it's not reasonable to expect everyone to be able to do that. So when I've been attempting to teach new people coming onto this, then it's amazing how many bits and pieces you discover that, oh yeah, I know this, but, but, but I've now got to explain it, you know, why, why URIs are in, are in angle brackets when you're writing them out in turtle or they're this compact form with a colon in the middle. And they both mean the same thing. They're both URIs, but, but a normal person looking at those says, no, they're not the same thing because they haven't got the, the lens sees on that I've got, which sees them that way. So and you know, I know people, anyone in the last 10 years is coming along to look at these things, wants to look at them in JSON and JSON gives me the shits, but it's, it's, but, but, but you know, that's not a fight I'm going to win. Not a fight I really want to win. You know, the JSON ecosystem is very, very rich and people really should be using JSON. It's just, just, just, it doesn't hit him. So, and then, and there's YAML coming along as well, or come along.

[00:25:21] SPEAKER_01: So RDF in YAML is not something I've actually got my head around either. I'd like to, but, but, but I'm, I'm way more efficient just working in turtle and then, and then using tools to, to, to convert it into other forms and that's, and that's fine. So, and that's another thing I use TopBraid for. I mean, I haven't renewed my TopBraid license in years because the one I've got is, works fine and I'm only using it in a relatively limited way. So, so that's... And you've worked with some people, like I know with me, we've used the, the SCOS, SCOS Play. Oh yeah. A couple of different Excel. Yeah. I haven't used that recently. The last time I was doing some conversions, I was just using Python.

[00:26:08] SPEAKER_01: But, and that was with some assist, you know, and it wasn't really me writing it. No, it was that Excel to Python, Excel, Excel using Python to get to RDF.  Yeah. Okay. Yeah.  Oh, that's all. Loading things into data frames in, in, in Python and, and who knows what. I'm a bit too old to learn too many new tricks, but.

[00:26:34] SPEAKER_01: And it's, and it's not really, it's not my day job anymore, is it? No, no, no, it's hard. So, so I have no opinion on Pool Party.  Okay.

[00:26:47] SPEAKER_01: RVA, you know, I, I really do think that the, the technical platform that RVA is sitting on, which is the Sysvok thing, which underneath that you've got, I can't open RDF for whatever it's called.

[00:27:08] SPEAKER_01: And there's some limitations that that platform introduces. On the one hand, I know that each vocabulary is in its own instance of the, of the RDF store.

[00:27:22] SPEAKER_01: And that's, that's, that's the way it works. It used to be called Sesame. It's called Open RDF or something these days.

[00:27:30] SPEAKER_01: But that, that choice is good. The thing that it supports is a very strong versioning scheme and the ability to roll back and see all the versions of a vocabulary very, very discreetly. However, it's bad because it means that links between vocabularies that are all sitting with an RVA essentially don't exist.

[00:28:03] SPEAKER_01: So, so, and it's, it's, you know, the, the whole Sysvok thing is, is, you know, 15 years old now and, and there's, there's, it's, it's, it's visual presentation is very creaky. And the, the API, which is actually what Sysvok is, it hasn't been taken up by anybody else. We'd be better looking at a more widely used platform. Now, what that is, I don't know, could be Scosmos, could be Prez.

[00:28:45] SPEAKER_01: But I don't think RVA should be running a bespoke stack, which is what it is at the moment. I think it should be adopting a stack which is used by other people as well. It should be joining a bigger software ecosystem with this.

[00:29:05] SPEAKER_01: Open source is, is, you know, always, I mean, more or less everything anybody does these days is open source anyway. But if you're the only ones using and maintaining this software stack, then you're not getting, you're not leveraging anybody else's contributions.

[00:29:24] SPEAKER_01: And you're essentially static. So, that, that, that needs to change.

[00:29:33] SPEAKER_01: Top three changes.

[00:29:36] SPEAKER_01: Mappings, new platform.

[00:29:47] SPEAKER_01: Something around governance. Governance is a bit creaky at the moment. And, you know, the open system, the open, you know, the, the fact that anyone can submit and publish one is good, but it can lead to a bit of a mess. May the probably, it'd probably be useful to have some kind of minimal review cycle. So, when someone submits a vocabulary that they get feedback on whether instead of submitting a new vocabulary, perhaps they could use this one that's already there.

[00:30:31] SPEAKER_01: Or, you know, have you talked to these other people in your discipline?

[00:30:36] SPEAKER_01: You know, the probably, you know, people should be encouraged to use the demo server to get things up to have a poke around and have a look at them. But then the transition from the demo to the production server probably should, probably should be a governance step as well as a technical step.

[00:30:57] SPEAKER_01: So, you know, a review basically.

[00:31:01] SPEAKER_01: I think that's, I think that's where I would go with that. Yeah, no, I did. There was an additional question, you know, Ro and I were chatting yesterday and said, well,

[00:31:14] SPEAKER_01: do we need to think about a minimum metadata model, you know, profile for vocabularies?

[00:31:29] SPEAKER_00: Yeah, do we have that, what's that look like in RVA?

[00:31:37] SPEAKER_01: It's the registry, isn't it, when you load vocabularies.

[00:31:49] SPEAKER_01: Sorry, I'm muted, I've dealt with it.

[00:31:54] SPEAKER_01: But I did miss what you were saying about what Ro and I have been discussing. Yeah, the requirement potentially for, when you say governance, some checking, whether there's a minimum metadata profile for vocabularies that we either,

[00:32:17] SPEAKER_01: yeah, do we have it, do we need it? I mean, there is one implied when you publish something in RVA, there are some, you know, there is metadata about these things which is going in. You can't submit something without filling out, you know, some of those forms when you're submitting. Now, the adequacy of those, you know, getting people to fill out metadata when they're submitting stuff is always a challenge.

[00:32:51] SPEAKER_01: But it's not unreasonable for a service like this where you really are offering a very, very valuable service to say, well, in order to utilize this really valuable service, then you have to, you know, there's a couple of hoops you have to jump through. I think the guidance about those could be better.

[00:33:15] SPEAKER_01: The forms probably just need more examples. You know, I wonder if there could be examples included in the forms, you know, at least for a mouseover, you know, and maybe just text in the form saying, you know, three, because some of the prompts from the names of the fields where you're typing stuff in, it's not obvious why it matters, you know. So, for example, where you have to put in something about the version, well, this is going to appear in the URI of the service. So don't make it a long sentence, right? Yeah, yeah. If I hadn't have had you there talking that through with me, I wouldn't have known what to do. Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.

[00:34:00] SPEAKER_01: You know, this has implications for how this is going to look once it's published on the current system.

[00:34:09] SPEAKER_01: Now, you know, that's some technical choices that Rowan and, and what's-his-face, sort of came to when they were putting it together. And there were other choices that might have been made, but they were after generating unique URIs, and so they were using information submitted by the submitter in order to build those. And that's a reasonable strategy, except that the submitters didn't necessarily know that that's what was going on. Yeah, yeah. Actually, it's a bit of a side question. Do you have any comments on the PIDs for, in the workflow of RVA? Any recommendations of... Well, I would hold up on those because of, because of the, you know, I mean, I'm, some of that stuff is a consequence of Sysvok. And if I'm already saying move to something different from Sysvok, then any, any detailed recommendations I'd have at this stage would be moot, or they'd need to be reconsidered in the light of whatever other platform was being used. So I'm reluctant to go into details there. So at the moment, is it handles? Is that what you call them? No, no, it's not the handles. It's the, it's the, when you, when you get a... 

[00:35:38] SPEAKER_01: Yeah, exactly.

[00:35:41] SPEAKER_01: The what? Sorry, I interrupted.  The slug. That's good. Absolutely.

[00:35:46] SPEAKER_01: Okay.

[00:35:48] SPEAKER_01: All right.

[00:35:53] SPEAKER_01: All right. So what would be the implications if we did not upgrade?

[00:36:02] SPEAKER_01: As you say, can't be able to handle mappings or upgrade. I think RVA is, will increasingly not,

[00:36:17] SPEAKER_01: you know, what we're already seeing is, you know, anyone who contracts

[00:36:22] SPEAKER_01: Kurawang gets a bespoke press installation put up.

[00:36:31] SPEAKER_01: And, and, and that's, and that's fine for organizations that have got a budget to go and contract Kurawang. But it means that more and more vocabularies are going to be off on their own services. And RVA will end up just being the bottom of the barrel of the ones who don't have anywhere better to go and, and, you know, possibly will lose some respect and, you know, the sort of, and credibility and trust because of that.

[00:37:10] SPEAKER_01: So I think it needs to keep up in order to retain the trust that it has had.

[00:37:22] SPEAKER_00: Yep.

[00:37:25] SPEAKER_01: So opportunities, exploring opportunities.

[00:37:32] SPEAKER_01: I guess you did mention the linked data, the linked open vocabulary. But are there anything, anything kind of services overseas that, or, you know, anywhere that you've thought, oh, well, that's great that RVA could look at adopting part of it, you know, adopting that stack or? OLS is pretty good.

[00:38:02] SPEAKER_01: But OLS, you know, comes out of the medical and life sciences communities and, and they, they have a lot of money, don't they?

[00:38:11] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. So do they store vocabularies as well?

[00:38:16] SPEAKER_01: You can, you can register vocabularies there and upload them there. Yes. Well, can you do it in OLS? I'm not sure.

[00:38:25] SPEAKER_01: Maybe that would be Biportal, an Agroportal is where things are. And I mean, you know, the other, the other system, of course, which is running is the one from Mike, what's his name up in Brisbane.

[00:38:43] SPEAKER_01: Glenn's cousin.

[00:38:46] SPEAKER_01: Came along to the first two vocabulary workshops.

[00:38:52] SPEAKER_00: Coming from the medical domain.

[00:38:58] SPEAKER_00: I can't remember. Anyway, yeah.

[00:39:04] SPEAKER_01: Yes. Onto server. Exactly. But that's full on, you know, that's thing is the med, the biomedical community has got a very different approach to the use of semantic technologies to most of the rest of the communities. It's all very cross linked and interlinked and they bought into it full time, full, full time. And, and, and that there's no other community that's even close to, to understanding what they're doing, let alone leveraging it. So, so, and, and, and they're not even, there's ways in which they're, you know, I don't particularly like what they do, but, but in terms of the, the coherence of the community, they're, you know, kind of exemplary, but in a way which is really hard to reproduce.

[00:39:58] SPEAKER_01: You know, for one thing, they have all kinds of regulatory sort of things which, which end up requiring people to use the system, which then ends up in introducing a whole quality assurance system, which very few disciplines would have access to because they don't have the regulatory imperative.

[00:40:25] SPEAKER_01: So, yeah. And if you're going to be put on a operating table, you want to know. Exactly. That the data's good. We don't have perhaps that driver in earth and environment.

[00:40:38] SPEAKER_01: It'd be nice if the environment was taken as seriously as that, but it isn't.

[00:40:43] SPEAKER_01: Have you had any experience or heard anything about the Onto Alliance?

[00:40:48] UNKNOWN: No.

[00:40:50] SPEAKER_01: Those instances?

[00:40:52] SPEAKER_01: Oh, so they're, they have got the spin-offs of implementations at Bioportal, AgriPortal,

[00:41:00] SPEAKER_01: whatever portal.

[00:41:01] SPEAKER_00: Yeah, okay.

[00:41:02] SPEAKER_01: I don't know much about them. Just came across the Onto Alliance and they're spinning out instances of this stack or whatever it is. So, yeah. I need to close the door so we're not getting quite as much back for it.

[00:41:24] SPEAKER_01: Yeah.

[00:41:25] SPEAKER_01: No, I don't. I haven't been following that, Megan.

[00:41:28] SPEAKER_01: So.

[00:41:32] SPEAKER_01: That's Clement.

[00:41:35] SPEAKER_00: Okay.

[00:41:36] SPEAKER_01: Leading that.

[00:41:37] SPEAKER_00: Yeah, okay.

[00:41:38] SPEAKER_01: So, it's fairly full on probably, I imagine, like ontology stuff.

[00:41:46] SPEAKER_00: Yeah, it would be.

[00:41:48] SPEAKER_01: All right. Yeah.  Okay. So, even if a service doesn't take, you know, if your ontologies is out of scope. Yes. To do the mappings.

[00:42:01] SPEAKER_01: Yes.

[00:42:03] SPEAKER_01: I don't see this as what just, you know, what I'm really trying to identify there.

[00:42:09] SPEAKER_01: You know, an incremental improvement.

[00:42:13] SPEAKER_01: Yeah. Right. And it's one that, you know, I made the case, it logically follows from some of the work that RVA is already doing.

[00:42:26] SPEAKER_01: So, which is hosting, not duplicates, but vocabularies with overlapping scope and therefore the need to have something which manages those overlaps, which is mappings.

[00:42:45] SPEAKER_01: Okay. Yep. Yeah. So, I think. We're getting towards the bottom of the screen. Yeah, whether there's anything else in particular. Yeah. You want to comment on or you think we haven't covered. I mean, I look, I could bang on for years in a sense, but I'm also aware that the exercise that you're doing here, you need to have discrete recommendations and steps forward that you can take. And so, I'm trying to be sensible about that. And, you know, and furthermore, let's be clear.

[00:43:28] SPEAKER_01: Let's not overreach, but let's also not undershoot. So, yeah. Yep. Can I ask a favour? Can I get you to just to repeat what with the SysFog?

[00:43:50] SPEAKER_01: The vocabulary, the loading and how it's a discrete.

[00:43:55] SPEAKER_01: Can you explain that again? Each vocabulary is in a discrete triple store. Which is essentially running in its own machine, its own instance or something separate from every other vocabulary in RBA. Oh, OK. So, it's separate? A separate container.

[00:44:18] SPEAKER_01: A separate container?

[00:44:19] SPEAKER_00: Yes.

[00:44:19] SPEAKER_01: So, does that make it hard to, the registry metadata say separate is not loaded as part of that vocabulary in the triple store? So, it's hard to search across? No, no, it's not. That's in a separate layer.

[00:44:38] SPEAKER_01: Yep. So, that makes it perhaps hard to be able to search across and link and map? Exactly. On the other hand, you know, there was that link data registry thing, which you may vaguely remember, which we were trying to use for a while. And that was a case where the company who was responsible for what they called epi tried to do the whole thing inside one triple store and it ended up being quite complex.

[00:45:09] SPEAKER_01: And I'm not sure where the link data registry is these days. I'm not, whether it's still a maintained product or whatever. It was being used a bit by the UK Met Office and a bit by the French Geological Survey. And I'm not sure whether they're still using or supporting it. And they had all of the metadata and all of the versioning and all of the content all in a single triple store. And it was kind of the paradigmatic, you know, this ought to be able to do everything. So, we will do everything. Now, I think, I suspect they overshot because it ended up having a few too many abstraction layers in there. There was always, you know, for every item in there, there was both the item and the registration record for the item in the triple store. So, there was kind of a shadow of two quite elaborate artifacts for each item in there.

[00:46:14] SPEAKER_01: Maybe that's just, you know, I've seen it written up two or three times and it almost seems like that is actually the only logical way to do it. But their implementation was pretty mind ending.

[00:46:30] SPEAKER_01: So, the dogs just let out now.

[00:46:34] SPEAKER_01: So, you need, yeah, so the comment earlier said about support, I guess. Is there something out there that's, you know, broadly adopted enough and open and there's a community that ARDC staff can... I'd be looking at scosmos or prez.

[00:46:53] SPEAKER_01: And scosmos, I think, is part of a little ecosystem together with vocbench. And the vocbench thing would be your pool party replacement and the scosmos would be the sysvoc replacement part of the puzzle. Okay, I think that's how it works.

[00:47:15] SPEAKER_01: But, you know, and vocbench, I think, is an Italian product and I think scosmos is a Finnish.

[00:47:22] SPEAKER_01: I think these maintainers that are in Finland, they work quite closely together. At least they did last time I looked at them, which is a few years ago now.

[00:47:33] SPEAKER_01: But, and otherwise you're at the mercy of korawong. What korawong do they implement? They use scosmos. No, no, no, they've got, they use prez. Prez. Yeah, vocprez and prez.

[00:47:48] SPEAKER_01: So, you know, I mean, they're nearer and, but, you know, you've got to wrangle Nick and his delivery priorities and such like. Is prez an open source? That's something that korawong have adopted. All of their software that is sitting in GitHub, so you can, so it's open source, but korawong developed it. I mean, Nick developed prez. They developed prez. Oh yeah. Okay. Oh yeah. Yeah. That's their, you know, was, I don't know if it anymore, was their core product. Now you can just pick it up and deploy it, but, you know, you're more likely to want to contract them to do it for you.

[00:48:36] SPEAKER_00: 

[00:48:37] UNKNOWN: 

[00:48:38] SPEAKER_01: And then you need to make, then you need to make sure the contract's written well.

[00:48:45] SPEAKER_01: So, because Nick's got a bit of a reputation about not finishing his deliveries.

[00:48:53] SPEAKER_01: No, that's good. Yeah, that's really good to know. Very insightful. Thank you. I know we're on time. So, you know, I'm a big fan of Nick's work. Don't get me wrong.

[00:49:05] SPEAKER_01: But as a contractor, I know from many people's reports.

